OSDOCS-1997: About Butane docs (#33794)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/installation-special-config-butane.adoc

[id="rhcos-installing-butane_{context}"]
== Installing Butane

You can install the Butane tool (`butane`) to create machine configs with {op-system} from a command-line interface. You can install `butane` on Linux, Windows, or macOS by downloading the related binary.

[TIP]
====
Butane releases are backwards-compatible with older releases and with the Fedora CoreOS Config Transpiler (FCCT), unless otherwise noted.
====

.Procedure

. Navigate to the Butane image download page at https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/.
. Get the `butane` binary:
.. For the newest version of Butane, get the latest `butane` image:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/latest/butane
----
+
.. Optional: For a specific type of architecture you are installing on, such as `butane-aarch64` or `butane-ppc641e`, indicate the appropriate URL. For example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/latest/butane-aarch64
----
+

> . Unpack and unzip the archive.

Author: It's not clear to me what to do from this point. I'm using steps from [Installing the OpenShift CLI](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.7/cli_reference/openshift_cli/getting-started-cli.html) for a workflow because I couldn't find an example for using the mirror site. Not sure what format the butane file is in. I got it downloaded using podman pull but my understanding is that we aren't using that in 4.8. 

Need some clarification of this process, please.

. Move the `butane` binary to a directory on your `PATH`.
+
To check your `PATH`, open a terminal and execute the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ echo $PATH
----

After you install the Butane tool, it is available by using the `butane` command:

[source,terminal]
----
$ butane <command>
----

[id="rhcos-creating-butane_{context}"]
== Creating an Ignition config with Butane

To create machines, you can create a Butane config file that Butane consumes and transpiles into a machine-readable Ignition config file for producing machine configs.

.Prerequisites

> * You have added your local SSH private key to the `ssh-agent`. See _Generating an SSH private key and adding it to the agent_ in the "Installing" section.

Author: Is this necessary or helpful? I can't xref specifically to the procedure cuz it's a module, but the workflow I'm using partly comes from here: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.7/installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal.html#ssh-agent-using_installing-bare-metal

* You have installed the `butane` utility.

> .Procedure

Author: Another question is whether we actually want or need to include this basic config example? We have use case-specific examples elsewhere in the Install Config doc in the parent assembly.

Reviewer: I'm not sure; maybe not.  If we do, maybe the example should include a non-Ignition field like the MachineConfig `kernelType`?

```yaml
openshift:
  kernel_type: realtime
```

We could link to the [full spec](https://coreos.github.io/butane/config-openshift-v4_8/) but that'd be an off-site link.

Author: Added `storage.filesystems` but feel free to suggest revisions for clarity or accuracy.

. Create a Butane config file, such as `99-simple-example.bu`, as shown in the following example:
+

> [source,yaml]

Author: The YAML is based on https://coreos.github.io/butane/getting-started/

----
variant: openshift
version: 4.8.0
metadata:

>   name: 99-simple-example

Reviewer: This example won't transpile because it's missing a mandatory metadata field:

```yaml
metadata:
  name: 99-simple-example
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
```

passwd:
  users:
    - name: core
      ssh_authorized_keys:
        - ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc... <1>
----
<1> Set the `ssh_authorized_keys` value to be your SSH public key, which is usually the contents of the `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` file on your system.

> . Set your ssh public key. On Linux systems, this is usually the contents of the `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` file.

Reviewer: This doesn't seem relevant.

. Create an Ignition config by giving Butane the file that you created in the previous step, for example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ ./bin/amd64/butane butane-example.bu
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
{"ignition":{"config":{"replace":{"source":null,"verification":{}}},"security":{"tls":{}},"timeouts":{},"version":"3.0.0"},"passwd":{"users":[{"name":"core","sshAuthorizedKeys":["ssh-rsa ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc..."]}]},"storage":{},"systemd":{}}
----
+

> An Ignition config is created. You can now provide the Ignition config to a booting {op-system} machine for Ignition to finish configuring your machines.

Author: If we include this example, should we add the step to generate the YAML file (`butane 99-simple-example.bu --files-dir . -o 99-simple-example.yaml`)?

Reviewer: With the `openshift` `4.8.0` spec, Butane generates MachineConfigs directly, and we should update the doc throughout to reflect this.

`--files-dir` is only relevant if `storage.trees` or `storage.files[].contents.local` is specified in the config, and should be omitted otherwise for clarity.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * installing/install_config/installing-customizing.adoc

[id="installation-special-config-butane_{context}"]
= Creating machine configs with Butane

Machine configs are used to deploy control plane and worker machines by telling machines how to create users and filesystems, set up the network, install systemd units, and more.

Because modifying machine configs can be difficult, you can use Butane configs to create machine configs for you, thereby making node configuration much easier.

== About Butane

> Butane is a YAML utility that {product-title} uses to provide convenient short-hand syntax for writing machine-readable machine configs, as well as for performing additional validation of  machine configs. The format of the Butane config file that Butane transpiles is defined in the

Reviewer: Some small wording improvements:

```suggestion
Butane is a command-line utility that {product-title} uses to provide convenient short-hand syntax for writing machine configs, as well as for performing additional validation of machine configs. The format of the Butane config file that Butane accepts is defined in the
```

https://coreos.github.io/butane/config-openshift-v4_8/[OpenShift Butane config spec].

[id="rhcos-installing-butane_{context}"]
== Installing Butane

> You can install the Butane tool (`butane`) to create {product-title} machine configs from a command-line interface. You can install `butane` on Linux, Windows, or macOS by downloading the related binary file.

Reviewer: Maybe s/related/corresponding/?

[TIP]
====
Butane releases are backwards-compatible with older releases and with the Fedora CoreOS Config Transpiler (FCCT).
====

.Procedure

. Navigate to the Butane image download page at https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/.
. Get the `butane` binary:
.. For the newest version of Butane, save the latest `butane` image to your current directory:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/latest/butane --output butane
----
+

> .. Optional: For a specific type of architecture you are installing Butane on, such as aarch64 or ppc641e, indicate the appropriate URL. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Optional: For a specific type of architecture you are installing Butane on, such as aarch64 or ppc64le, indicate the appropriate URL. For example:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/latest/butane-aarch64
----

. Move the `butane` binary file to a directory on your `PATH`.
+
To check your `PATH`, open a terminal and execute the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ echo $PATH
----
+
. Make the downloaded binary file (for example, `butane`) executable:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ chmod +x butane
----
+
You can now use the Butane tool by running the `butane` command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ butane <butane_file.bu>
----

[id="rhcos-creating-with-butane_{context}"]
== Creating a `MachineConfig` object by using Butane

> By using Butane, you can produce a `MachineConfig` object so that you can configure worker or master nodes at installation time or via the Machine Config Operator.

Reviewer: s/master/control plane/?

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the `butane` utility.

.Procedure

. Create a Butane config YAML file. The following example tells the {product-title} cluster to use a real-time kernel for all worker nodes:
+

> [source,terminal]

Reviewer: For improved syntax highlighting, I've been putting the filename (`99-worker-realtime.bu`) in the bullet text above, then using `[source,yaml]` here and dropping the `cat`/`EOF` lines.

Author: Cool, I originally had `[source,yaml]` but talked myself into combining steps. I've edited to more closely match your `99-simple-kmod.bu` example.

----
$ cat <<EOF > 99-worker-realtime.bu
variant: openshift
version: 4.8.0
metadata:
  name: 99-worker-realtime
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
openshift:

>     kernel_type: realtime

Reviewer: Two-space indent for consistency.

EOF
----
+
[NOTE]
====
The `99-worker-realtime.bu` is set to create a machine config for the real-time kernel on worker nodes. To deploy on control plane nodes, change the role from `worker` to `master` and change the kernel type to `default`. To do both, you could repeat the whole procedure using different file names for the two types of deployments.
====

. Create a `MachineConfig` object by giving Butane the file that you created in the previous step, for example:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ butane $HOME/<cluster_config_dir>/99-worker-realtime.bu -o ./99-worker-realtime.yaml

Reviewer: We didn't tell them where to put the Butane config, so maybe we should omit the directory part of the input argument?

Author: Yes, agreed

----
+
A `MachineConfig` object YAML file is created for you to finish configuring your machines.

> . Save the Butane config in case you need to update the manifest in the future.

Reviewer: s/manifest/`MachineConfig` object/ for consistency.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * installing/install_config/installing-customizing.adoc

[id="installation-special-config-butane_{context}"]
= Creating machine configs with Butane

> Machine configs are used to deploy control plane and worker machines by telling machines how to create users and filesystems, set up the network, install systemd units, and more.

Reviewer 2: I think using "deploy" here is the wrong verb.  When I think of deploying machines, I think of either installing the cluster from scratch, scaling up MachineSets, or manually adding nodes to the cluster.

I would prefer to say that machine configs are used to *configure* machines.

Author: Good clarification...resolved.

> Machine configs are used to configure control plane and worker machines by telling machines how to create users and filesystems, set up the network, install systemd units, and more.

Author: I never which way to land with backticks for systemd, etcd, initramfs, etc. There are several occurrences without the markup, so I'm going to leave it bare for now. But def a good topic for the next Great Style Debate.

You can install the Butane tool (`butane`) to create {product-title} machine configs from a command-line interface. You can install `butane` on Linux, Windows, or macOS by downloading the corresponding binary file.

[TIP]
====
Butane releases are backwards-compatible with older releases and with the Fedora CoreOS Config Transpiler (FCCT).
====

.Procedure

. Navigate to the Butane image download page at https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/.
. Get the `butane` binary:
.. For the newest version of Butane, save the latest `butane` image to your current directory:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/latest/butane --output butane
----
+
.. Optional: For a specific type of architecture you are installing Butane on, such as aarch64 or ppc64le, indicate the appropriate URL. For example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/butane/latest/butane-aarch64 --output butane
----

. Move the `butane` binary file to a directory on your `PATH`.
+
To check your `PATH`, open a terminal and execute the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ echo $PATH
----
+

> . Make the downloaded binary file executable:

Reviewer: Let's move this before the previous step, since `chmod +x butane` assumes the binary is still in the current directory and we've just moved it out.

Author: Good call!

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ chmod +x butane
----
+
You can now use the Butane tool by running the `butane` command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ butane <butane_file.bu>

Reviewer: Yeah, I agree with dropping the `.bu` here.

----

[id="rhcos-creating-with-butane_{context}"]
== Creating a MachineConfig object by using Butane

By using Butane, you can produce a `MachineConfig` object so that you can configure worker or control plane nodes at installation time or via the Machine Config Operator.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the `butane` utility.

.Procedure

. Create a Butane config file, `99-worker-realtime.bu`, that tells the {product-title} cluster to use a real-time kernel for all worker nodes, for example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
variant: openshift
version: 4.8.0
metadata:
  name: 99-worker-realtime
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
openshift:
  kernel_type: realtime
storage
  filesystems:
    - device: /dev/mapper/root

>       format: ext4

Author: Thank you! Much classier than anything I could come up with. :)

>       format: ext4

Author: Also, I changed the name and repeated occurrences throughout to `99-worker-console` (s/realtime/console).

----
+
[NOTE]
====
The `99-worker-realtime.bu` is set to create a machine config for the real-time kernel on worker nodes. To deploy on control plane nodes, change the role from `worker` to `master` and change the kernel type to `default`. To do both, you could repeat the whole procedure using different file names for the two types of deployments.
====

. Create a `MachineConfig` object by giving Butane the file that you created in the previous step, for example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ butane 99-worker-realtime.bu -o ./99-worker-realtime.yaml
----
+
A `MachineConfig` object YAML file is created for you to finish configuring your machines.
. Save the Butane config in case you need to update the `MachineConfig` object in the future.

> . If the cluster is not up yet, generate manifest files and add the `MachineConfig` object YAML file to the `openshift` directory. If the cluster is already running, apply the file as follows:

Author: running++

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f 99-worker-realtime.yaml
----

> For more detailed Butane config examples, see _Adding kernel modules to nodes_ and _Encrypting or mirroring disks during installation_.

Author: Yes, that makes more sense!

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * installing/install_config/installing-customizing.adoc

[id="installation-special-config-butane_{context}"]
= Creating machine configs with Butane

Machine configs are used to configure control plane and worker machines by instructing machines how to create users and file systems, set up the network, install systemd units, and more.

Because modifying machine configs can be difficult, you can use Butane configs to create machine configs for you, thereby making node configuration much easier.

[id="rhcos-about-butane_{context}"]
== About Butane

Butane is a command-line utility that {product-title} uses to provide convenient, short-hand syntax for writing machine configs, as well as for performing additional validation of machine configs. The format of the Butane config file that Butane accepts is defined in the

> https://coreos.github.io/butane/specs/[OpenShift Butane config spec].

Author: Rather than specify the OpenShift 4.8.0 spec, I went up a dir-level to keep it green.
